Follows some questions / inspirations from John C. and the answers (tbd.)

Q: What will be the use case of the demo application?
A: tbd.

Q: What will be the content of the scene (Avatars, Models, ......)? What is a
   "collaboration"? Which "collaborations" will we implement?
A: tbd.

Q: What is a "shared state"?
   Note that I have difficulty talking about state because of multiple meanings,
   political, physics etc. Do you really just mean state, state of what?  What
   does the state transition network look like?
A: tbd.

Q: How to apply the pub/sub pattern to our case? Which values to transmit?
   Even objects? Files? Videos? What are the "topics"?
A: tbd.

Q: What content are we designing in to our messages?   What do we require of the
   underlying system beside transport? Multimedia? In-order messages? Signaling?
A: tbd.

Q: I would rather discuss the HLAP (High Level Application Protocol), and let
   the HLAP choose a software infrastructure based on requirements of the HLAP
   (That is, set requirements for the lower level protocols). Once we have a
   shopping list of requirements, we go shopping for something compatible with
   Web3D’s Intellectual Property rules.
   Requirements of a transport for HLAP:
    Many to Many topics and messaging capable of carrying or referring to X3D
          multimedia, Avatars, Inventory and Communication.
          At up to ?? messages per second
    Federated messaging (possibly spatiotemporal)
    Conferences/Rooms/Channels/Topics for private X3D worlds
    Block a publisher
    Report a publisher
    Message log/replay.
    Edit own messages.
    Conference/Topic/Room/Channel search?
    Usable from HTML5 web.
   Please provide input for this list.
A: tbd.
 
Q: Which functions do we delegate to the transport protocol? (voice, IM, ......)
A: tbd.

Q: What are the "master rules"?
A: 1) SP-ARK is dedicated to the use (and support) of X3Dv4
   2) basically, the playground is open to anybody, who is interested in simple
      multiuser scenes
   3) probably we will implement some demo application maybe even a server
      (depends on support)
   4) Goal 1: help the Web3D Consortium in defining an application layer
              protocol for the Network Sensor
   5) SP-ARK has not been started yet, but with this e-mail the probability of a
      start increases :-)
