Gesendet: Sonntag, 31. März 2019 um 21:14 Uhr
Von: "John Carlson" <yottzumm@gmail.com>
An: "X3D Graphics public mailing list" <x3d-public@web3d.org>,
    "Christoph Valentin" <christoph.valentin@gmx.at>
Betreff: New X3D network working group suggestion: Standards for
         collaboration I/O, processing and storage (SP-ARK)

Way up above the networksensor protocol is the concept of collaborate.  How can
we effectively store and communicate collaborations?  Do they effectively store
to a typical hierarchical file system, ala Git or Google Docs or do we need to
create a new technology for collaborations? Might collaborations be “part of
the network”?  What if you couldn’t work without someone to collaborate with?
Can a collaboration include parts of the physical world?

Christoph, you can add this as a comment to SP-ARK.  I think we need to develop
some use cases or user stories for SP-ARK that involve collaboration if they are
not already there:

Primary actions are Create, Delete, Change, Inspect,  Add, Remove, Move, Copy,
                    Grant, Revoke. Record Date/Time for all actions performed.
Create Collaboration
Create Object
Create Subject
Delete Collaboration
Delete Object
Delete Subject
Change Collaboration
Change Object
Change Subject
Inspect Collaboration
Inspect Object
Inspect Subject
Add Subject to Collaboration
Add Object to Collaboration
Add Collaboration to Collaboration
Remove Subject from Collaboration
Remove Object from Collaboration
Remove Collaboration from Collaboration
Move Subject to Location, Orientation in Collaboration
Move Object to Location, Orientation in Collaboration
Copy Object between Collaborations
Copy Collaboration between Collaborations
Move Collaboration to Location, Orientation in Collaboration
Grant access to “Collaboration, Object, Action” (key) to Subject
Revoke access to “Collaboration, Object, Action” from Subject

So for pc.multiplayer, there are 3 collaborations, global tag, card game and chat, managed by a server.

Objects include location, card and message
Subjects are clients
There is no real collaboration, except the server is effectively a collaboration.
There is limited communication between servers.

No grant/revoke.

Collaboration might be thought of as a server, table, channel, room, or 
                                       conversation all at once.

More?  I believe if we implement this much for a network protocol for SP-ARK, we
will have achieved quite a bit.

We should probably prototype with an easy to use protocol, that can be used from
JavaScript, and “upgrade” to a more industrial protocol once we have the patterns
down. That is, lower levels can be swapped out by vendors. Thus we need a
“JPA-like (Hibernate)” level which unifies the persistence and communication.
I am thinking some object attributes can be annotated as persistent and/or
communicateable.

What do you view as the primary SP-ARK actions?

John

